

===== PAGE 1 =====

 
Indian Accounting Standard (Ind AS) 2  
 
Inventories# 
 
 
(This Indian Accounting Standard includes paragraphs set in bold type and plain type, which have 
equal authority. Paragraphs in bold italic type indicate the main principles.)   
 
Objective 
 
1 
The objective of this Standard is to prescribe the accounting treatment for inventories.  
A primary issue in accounting for inventories is the amount of cost to be recognised 
as an asset and carried forward until the related revenues are recognised.  This 
Standard deals with the determination of cost and its subsequent recognition as an 
expense, including any write-down to net realisable value. It also provides guidance 
on the cost formulas that are used to assign costs to inventories. 
 
Scope 
 
2 
This Standard applies to all inventories, except: 
 
(a) 
1Omitted 
 
(b) 
financial  instruments  (Ind AS 32,  Financial  Instruments:  Presentation 
and  Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments); and 
 
(c) 
biological assets (ie living animals or plants) related to agricultural 
activity and agricultural produce at the point of harvest (See  Ind AS 41, 
Agriculture). 
 
3 
This Standard does not apply to the measurement of inventories held by: 
 
(a) 
producers  of  agricultural  and  forest  products,  agricultural  produce  
after harvest,  and  minerals  and  mineral  products,  to  the  extent that  
they  are measured at net realisable value in   accordance with well-
established practices in those industries. When such inventories are 
measured at net realisable value, changes in that value are recognised in 
profit or loss in the period of the change. 
 
(b) 
commodity broker-traders who measure their inventories at fair value 
less costs to sell.  When such inventories are measured at fair value less 
                                               
#  This Ind AS was notified vide G.S.R. 111(E) dated 16th February, 2015 and was amended vide 
Notification No. G.S.R. 365(E) dated 30th March, 2016 and G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. 
 
1 Refer Appendix 1. Substituted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 365(E) dated 30th March, 2016 and 
omitted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. Prior to substitution in 2016, 
the sub-paragraph read as under: 
(a) [Refer Appendix 1] 
Prior to omission in 2018, the sub-paragraph read as under: 
(a)work in progress arising under construction contracts, including directly related 
service contracts (see Ind AS 11, Construction Contracts); 
See para 23 and 25
page 5 and 6


===== PAGE 2 =====

 
costs to sell, changes in fair value less costs to sell are recognised in profit 
or loss in the period of the change. 
 
4 
The inventories referred to in paragraph 3(a) are measured at net realisable value at 
certain stages of production. This occurs, for example, when agricultural crops have 
been harvested or minerals have been extracted and sale is assured under a forward 
contract or a government guarantee, or when an active market exists and there is a 
negligible risk of failure to sell. These inventories are excluded from only the 
measurement requirements of this Standard. 
 
5 
Broker-traders are those who buy or sell commodities for others or on their own 
account. The inventories referred to in paragraph 3(b) are principally acquired with 
the purpose of selling in the near future and generating a profit from fluctuations in 
price or broker-traders’ margin. When these inventories are measured at fair value 
less costs to sell, they are excluded from only the measurement requirements of this 
Standard. 
 
Definitions 
 
6 
The following terms are used in this Standard with the meanings specified: 
 
Inventories are assets: 
 
(a) 
held for sale in the ordinary course of business; 
 
(b) 
in the process of production for such sale; or 
 
(c) 
in  the  form  of  materials  or  supplies  to  be  consumed  in the  
production process or in the rendering of services. 
 
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of 
business less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary 
to make the sale. 
 
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a 
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the 
measurement date. (See Ind AS 113, Fair Value Measurement.) 
 
 
7 
Net realisable value refers to the net amount that an entity expects to realise from the 
sale of inventory in the ordinary course of business. . Fair value reflects the price at 
which an orderly transaction to sell the same inventory in the principal (or most 
advantageous) market for that inventory would take place between market 
participants at the measurement date. The former is an entity-specific value; the latter 
is not. Net realisable value for inventories may not equal fair value less costs to sell. 
 


===== PAGE 3 =====

 
8 
2Inventories encompass goods purchased and held for resale including, for example, 
merchandise purchased by a retailer and held for resale, or land and other property 
held for resale. Inventories also encompass finished goods produced, or work in 
progress being produced, by the entity and include materials and supplies awaiting 
use in the production process.  Costs incurred to fulfil a contract with a customer that 
do not give rise to inventories (or assets within the scope of another Standard) are 
accounted for in accordance with Ind AS 115, Revenue from Contracts with 
Customers. 
 
Measurement of inventories 
 
9 
Inventories shall be measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value. 
 
Cost of inventories 
 
10 
The cost of inventories shall comprise all costs of purchase, costs of conversion 
and other costs incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and 
condition. 
 
Costs of purchase 
 
11 
The costs of purchase of inventories comprise the purchase price, import duties and 
other taxes (other than those subsequently recoverable by the entity from the taxing 
authorities), and transport, handling and other costs directly attributable to the 
acquisition of finished goods, materials and services.  Trade discounts, rebates and 
other similar items are deducted in determining the costs of purchase. 
 
Costs of conversion 
 
12 
The costs of conversion of inventories include costs directly related to the units of 
production, such as direct labour.   They also include a systematic allocation of fixed   
and   variable   production   overheads   that   are   incurred   in   converting materials 
into finished goods. Fixed production overheads are those indirect costs of production 
that remain relatively constant regardless of the volume of production, such as 
depreciation and maintenance of factory buildings and equipment, and the cost of 
factory management and administration. Variable production overheads are those 
                                               
2 Substituted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 365(E) dated 30th March, 2016 and, thereafter, substituted 
vide Notification No.  G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. Prior to substitution in 2016, the 
paragraph read as under: 
8 Inventories encompass goods purchased and held for resale including, for example, merchandise 
purchased by a retailer and held for resale, or land and other property held for resale. Inventories 
also encompass finished goods produced, or work in progress being produced, by the entity and 
include materials and supplies awaiting use in the production process. Costs incurred to fulfil a 
contract with a customer that do not give rise to inventories (or assets within the scope of another 
Standard) are accounted for in accordance with Ind AS 115, Revenue from Contracts with 
Customers. 
 
Prior to substitution in 2018, the paragraph read as under: 
8 Inventories encompass goods purchased and held for resale including, for example, merchandise 
purchased by a retailer and held for resale, or land and other property held for resale. Inventories 
also encompass finished goods produced, or work in progress being produced, by the entity and 
include materials and supplies awaiting use in the production process. In the case of a service 
provider, inventories include the costs of the service, as described in paragraph 19, for which the 
entity has not yet recognised the related revenue (see Ind AS 18, Revenue). 
 


===== PAGE 4 =====

 
indirect costs of production that vary directly, or nearly directly, with the volume of 
production, such as indirect materials and indirect labour. 
 
13 
The allocation of fixed production overheads to the costs of conversion is based on 
the normal capacity of the production facilities.  Normal capacity is the production 
expected to be achieved on average over a number of periods or seasons under normal 
circumstances, taking into account the loss of capacity resulting from planned 
maintenance. The actual level of production may be used if it approximates normal 
capacity. The amount of fixed overhead allocated to each unit of production is not 
increased as a consequence of low production or idle plant. Unallocated overheads are 
recognised as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.  In periods of 
abnormally high production, the amount of fixed overhead allocated to each unit of 
production is decreased so that inventories are not measured above cost.  Variable 
production overheads are allocated to each unit of production on the basis of the 
actual use of the production facilities. 
 
14 
A production process may result in more than one product being produced 
simultaneously. This is the case, for example, when joint products are produced or 
when there is a main product and a by-product. When the costs of conversion of each 
product are not separately identifiable, they are allocated between the products on a 
rational and consistent basis. The allocation may be based, for example, on the 
relative sales value of each product either at the stage in the production process when 
the products become separately identifiable, or at the completion of production. Most 
by-products, by their nature, are immaterial. When this is the case, they are often 
measured at net realisable value and this value is deducted from the cost of the main 
product. As a result, the carrying amount of the main product is not materially 
different from its cost. 
 
Other costs 
 
15 
Other costs are included in the cost of inventories only to the extent that they are 
incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition. For 
example, it may be appropriate to include non-production overheads or the costs of 
designing products for specific customers in the cost of inventories. 
 
16 
Examples of costs excluded from the cost of inventories and recognised as expenses 
in the period in which they are incurred are: 
 
(a) 
abnormal amounts of wasted materials, labour or other production costs; 
 
(b) 
storage  costs,  unless  those  costs  are  necessary  in  the  production  process 
before a further production stage; 
 
(c) 
administrative overheads that do not contribute to bringing inventories to 
their present location and condition; and 
 
(d) 
selling costs. 
 
17 
Ind AS 23, Borrowing Costs, identifies limited circumstances where borrowing costs 
are included in the cost of inventories. 
 
18 
An entity may purchase inventories on deferred settlement terms. When the 
arrangement effectively contains a financing element, that element, for example a 
difference between the purchase price for normal credit terms and the amount paid, is 
recognised as interest expense over the period of the financing. 


===== PAGE 5 =====

 
 
Cost of inventories of a service provider 
 
19 
3Omitted 
 
Cost of agricultural produce harvested from biological assets 
 
20  
In accordance with Ind AS 41, Agriculture, inventories comprising agricultural 
produce that an entity has harvested from its biological assets are measured on initial 
recognition at their fair value less costs to sell at the point of harvest. This is the cost 
of the inventories at that date for application of this Standard. 
 
Techniques for the measurement of cost 
 
21 
Techniques for the measurement of the cost of inventories, such as the standard cost 
method or the retail method, may be used for convenience if the results approximate 
cost. Standard costs take into account normal levels of materials and supplies, labour, 
efficiency and capacity utilisation. They are regularly reviewed and, if necessary, 
revised in the light of current conditions. 
 
22 
The retail method is often used in the retail industry for measuring inventories of 
large numbers of rapidly changing items with similar margins for which it is 
impracticable to use other costing methods. The cost of the inventory is determined 
by reducing the sales value of the inventory by the appropriate percentage gross 
margin.  The percentage used takes into consideration inventory that has been marked 
down to below its original selling price. An average percentage for each retail 
department is often used. 
 
Cost Formulas 
 
23 
4The cost of inventories of items that are not ordinarily interchangeable and 
goods or services produced and segregated for specific projects shall be assigned 
by using specific identification of their individual costs. 
 
24 
Specific identification of cost means that specific costs are attributed to identified 
items of inventory. This is the appropriate treatment for items that are segregated for a 
                                               
3 Refer Appendix 1. Substituted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 365(E) dated 30th March, 2016 and 
omitted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. Prior to substitution in 2016, 
the paragraph read as under: 
19 
[Refer Appendix 1] 
 
Prior to omission in 2018,  the paragraph read as under: 
19 
To the extent that service providers have inventories, they measure them at the costs 
of their production. These costs consist primarily of the labour and other costs of 
personnel directly engaged in providing the service, including supervisory personnel, 
and attributable overheads. Labour and other costs relating to sales and general 
administrative personnel are not included but are recognised as expenses in the period 
in which they are incurred. The cost of inventories of a service provider does not 
include profit margins or non-attributable overheads that are often factored into prices 
charged by service providers. 
4 Substituted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. Prior to substitution, the 
paragraph read as under: 
23 
The cost of inventories of items that are not ordinarily interchangeable and goods or services 
produced and segregated for specific projects shall be assigned by using specific identification 
of their individual costs. 


===== PAGE 6 =====

 
specific project, regardless of whether they have been bought or produced. However, 
specific identification of costs is inappropriate when there are large numbers of items 
of inventory that are ordinarily interchangeable. In such circumstances, the method of 
selecting those items that remain in inventories could be used to obtain predetermined 
effects on profit or loss. 
 
25 
The cost of inventories, other than those dealt with in paragraph 23, shall be 
assigned by using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) or weighted average cost formula. 
An entity shall use the same cost formula for all inventories having a similar 
nature and use to the entity. For inventories with a different nature or use, 
different cost formulas may be justified. 
 
26 
For example, inventories used in one operating segment may have a use to the entity 
different from the same type of inventories used in another operating segment.  
However, a difference in geographical location of inventories (or in the respective tax 
rules), by itself, is not sufficient to justify the use of different cost formulas. 
 
27 
The FIFO formula assumes that the items of inventory that were purchased or      
produced first are sold first, and consequently the items remaining in inventory at the 
end of the period are those most recently purchased or produced.  Under the weighted 
average cost formula, the cost of each item is determined from the weighted average 
of the cost of similar items at the beginning of a period and the cost of similar items 
purchased or produced during the period.  The average may be calculated on a 
periodic basis, or as each additional shipment is received, depending upon the 
circumstances of the entity. 
 
Net realisable value 
 
28 
The cost of inventories may not be recoverable if those inventories are damaged, if 
they have become wholly or partially obsolete, or if their selling prices have declined. 
The cost of inventories may also not be recoverable if the estimated costs of 
completion or the estimated costs to be incurred to make the sale have increased. The 
practice of writing inventories down below cost to net realisable value is consistent 
with the view that assets should not be carried in excess of amounts expected to be 
realised from their sale or use. 


===== PAGE 7 =====

 
29 
5Inventories are usually written down to net realisable value item by item. In some 
circumstances, however, it may be appropriate to group similar or related items. This 
may be the case with items of inventory relating to the same product line that have 
similar purposes or end uses, are produced and marketed in the same geographical 
area, and cannot be practicably evaluated separately from other items in that product 
line. It is not appropriate to write inventories down on the basis of a classification of 
inventory, for example, finished goods, or all the inventories in a particular operating 
segment. 
 
30 
Estimates of net realisable value are based on the most reliable evidence available at 
the time the estimates are made, of the amount the inventories are expected to realise. 
These estimates take into consideration fluctuations of price or cost directly relating 
to events occurring after the end of the period to the extent that such events confirm 
conditions existing at the end of the period. 
 
31 
Estimates of net realisable value also take into consideration the purpose for which 
the inventory is held. For example, the net realisable value of the quantity of 
inventory held to satisfy firm sales or service contracts is based on the contract price.  
If the sales contracts are for less than the inventory quantities held, the net realisable 
value of the excess is based on general selling prices. Provisions may arise from firm 
sales contracts in excess of inventory quantities held or from firm purchase contracts.  
Such provisions are dealt with under Ind AS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities 
and Contingent Assets. 
 
32 
Materials and other supplies held for use in the production of inventories are not 
written down below cost if the finished products in which they will   be incorporated 
are expected to be sold at or above cost. However, when a decline in the price of 
materials indicates that the cost of the finished products exceeds net realisable value, 
the materials are written down to net realisable value. In such circumstances, the 
replacement cost of the materials may be the best available measure of their net 
realisable value. 
 
33 
A new assessment is made of net realisable value in each subsequent period.  When 
the circumstances that previously caused inventories to be written down below cost 
                                               
5 Substituted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 365(E) dated 30th March, 2016 and, thereafter, substituted 
vide Notification No.  G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. Prior to substitution in 2016, the 
paragraph read as under: 
29 Inventories are usually written down to net realisable value item by item. In some circumstances, 
however, it may be appropriate to group similar or related items. This may be the case with items 
of inventory relating to the same product line that have similar purposes or end uses, are produced 
and marketed in the same geographical area, and cannot be practicably evaluated separately from 
other items in that product line. It is not appropriate to write inventories down on the basis of a 
classification of inventory, for example, finished goods, or all the inventories in a particular 
operating segment. 
 
Prior to substitution in 2018, the paragraph read as under: 
29 Inventories are usually written down to net realisable value item by item.  In some circumstances, 
however, it may be appropriate to group similar or related items.  This may be the case with items 
of inventory relating to the same product line that have similar purposes or end uses, are produced 
and marketed in the same geographical area, and cannot be practicably evaluated separately from 
other items in that product line. It is not appropriate to write inventories down on the basis of a 
classification of inventory, for example, finished goods, or all the inventories in a particular 
operating segment. Services providers generally accumulate costs in respect of each service for 
which a separate selling price is charged. Therefore, each such service is treated as a separate 
item. 
 


===== PAGE 8 =====

 
no longer exist or when there is clear evidence of an increase in net realisable value 
because of changed economic circumstances, the amount of the write-down is 
reversed (ie the reversal is limited to the amount of the original write-down) so that 
the new carrying amount is the lower of the cost and the revised net realisable value.  
This occurs, for example, when an item of inventory that is carried at net realisable 
value, because its selling price has declined, is still on hand in a subsequent period 
and its selling price has increased. 
 
 
Recognition as an expense 
 
34 
When inventories are sold, the carrying amount of those inventories shall be 
recognised as an expense in the period in which the related revenue is 
recognised. The amount of any write-down of inventories to net realisable value 
and all losses of inventories shall be recognised as an expense in the period the 
write-down or loss occurs.  The amount of any reversal of any write-down of 
inventories, arising from an increase in net realisable value, shall be recognised 
as a reduction in the amount of inventories recognised as an expense in the 
period in which the reversal occurs. 
 
35 
Some inventories may be allocated to other asset accounts, for example, inventory 
used as a component of self-constructed property, plant or equipment. Inventories 
allocated to another asset in this way are recognised as an expense during the useful 
life of that asset. 
 
 
Disclosure 
 
36 
The financial statements shall disclose: 
 
(a) 
the  accounting  policies  adopted  in  measuring  inventories,  including  
the cost formula  used; 
 
(b) 
the  total  carrying  amount  of  inventories  and  the  carrying  amount  
in classifications appropriate to the entity; 
 
(c) 
the carrying amount of inventories carried at fair value less costs to sell; 
 
(d) 
the amount of inventories recognised as an expense during the period; 
 
(e) 
the amount of any write-down of inventories recognised as an expense in 
the period in accordance with paragraph 34; 
 
(f) 
the  amount  of  any  reversal  of  any  write-down  that  is  recognised  as  
a reduction in the amount of inventories recognised as expense in the 
period in accordance with paragraph 34; 
 
(g) 
the  circumstances  or  events  that  led  to  the  reversal  of  a  write-
down  of inventories in accordance with paragraph 34; and 
 
(h) 
the carrying amount of inventories pledged as security for liabilities. 
 


===== PAGE 9 =====

 
37 
6Information about the carrying amounts held in different classifications of 
inventories and the extent of the changes in these assets is useful to financial 
statement users. Common classifications of inventories are merchandise, production 
supplies, materials, work in progress and finished goods. 
 
38 
[Refer Appendix 1]  
 
39 
An entity adopts a format for profit or loss that results in amounts being disclosed 
other than the cost of inventories recognised as an expense during the period.  Under 
this format, the entity presents an analysis of expenses using a classification based on 
the nature of expenses.  In this case, the entity discloses the costs recognised as an 
expense for raw materials and consumables, labour costs and other costs together with 
the amount of the net change in inventories for the period. 
 
7Effective Date 
 
40 
* 
40A 
* 
40B 
* 
40C 
* 
40D 
*  
40E  As a consequence of issuance of Ind AS 115, Revenue from Contracts with 
Customers, paragraphs 2, 8, 29, 37 are amended. An entity shall apply those 
amendments when it applies Ind AS 115. 
                                               
6 Substituted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 365(E) dated 30th March, 2016 and, thereafter, substituted 
vide Notification No. G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. Prior to substitution in 2016, the 
paragraph read as under: 
37 Information about the carrying amounts held in different classifications of inventories and the 
extent of the changes in these assets is useful to financial statement users. Common 
classifications of inventories are merchandise, production supplies, materials, work in progress 
and finished goods. 
 
Prior to substitution in 2018, the paragraph read as under: 
37 Information about the carrying amounts held in different classifications of inventories 
and the extent of the changes in these assets is useful to financial statement users.  
Common classifications of inventories are merchandise, production supplies, materials, 
work in progress and finished goods.  The inventories of a service provider may be 
described as work in progress. 
 
7 Heading and paragraphs 40-40E inserted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. 
 
* Refer Appendix 1 


===== PAGE 10 =====

 
Appendix A 
 
References to matters contained in other Indian Accounting Standards 
 
This Appendix is an integral part of the Ind AS. 
 
This appendix lists the appendix which is a part of another Indian Accounting Standard and 
makes reference to Ind AS 2, Inventories. 
 
 
1 
Appendix A, Intangible Assets-Web site Costs, contained in Ind AS 38, Intangible 
Assets. 
 
2 
Appendix B, Stripping Costs in the Production  Phase of a Surface Mine, contained 
in Ind AS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment. 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 11 =====

 
Appendix 1 
 
Note: This Appendix is not a part of the Indian Accounting Standard. The purpose of this 
Appendix is only to bring out the major differences, if any, between Indian Accounting 
Standard (Ind AS) 2 and the corresponding International Accounting Standard (IAS) 2, 
Inventories, issued by the International Accounting Standards Board. 
Comparison with IAS 2, Inventories 
1 
Paragraph 38 of IAS 2 dealing with recognition of inventories as an expense based on 
function-wise classification, has been deleted keeping in view the fact that option 
provided in IAS 1 to present an analysis of expenses recognised in profit or loss using 
a classification based on their function within the entity has been removed and Ind AS 
1 requires only nature-wise classification of expenses. However, in order to maintain 
consistency with paragraph numbers of IAS 2, the paragraph number is retained in 
Ind AS 2. 
2 
8Following paragraph numbers appear as ‘Deleted’ in IAS 2. In order to maintain 
consistency with paragraph numbers of IAS 2, the paragraph numbers are retained in 
Ind AS 2: 
(i)  Paragraph 2(a) 
(ii) Paragraph 19. 
3.  
9Paragraphs 40 to 40D related to effective date have not been included in Ind AS 2 as 
these are not relevant in Indian context. However, in order to maintain consistency 
with paragraph numbers of IAS 2, these paragraph numbers are retained in Ind AS 2. 
 
 
  
 
 
                                               
8 Omitted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 365(E) dated 30th March, 2016 and, thereafter, inserted vide 
Notification No.  G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. Prior to omission in 2016, the paragraph 
read as under: 
2 Following paragraph numbers appear as ‘Deleted’ in IAS 2. In order to maintain consistency with 
paragraph numbers of IAS 2, the paragraph numbers are retained in Ind AS 2:  
(i) Paragraph 2(a)  
(ii) Paragraph 19. 
 
 
9 Inserted vide Notification No. G.S.R. 310(E) dated 28th March, 2018. 
